CHAPTER 6.1
What is an Object?

Python is an object-oriented programming language and that means we work primarily with objects. In this lesson, we'll take a closer look at what an object is.

Documentation for This Video
Python Classes Documentation (https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/classes.html)


What Is an Object?

Objects can be a little confusing, but a good way to think about objects is that they are entities encompassing data and functionality. Let's take a look at the built-in types we've been using to look at the data and functionality encompassed by them. Custom object types are more complex than the built-in types, but looking at the primitive types will help us understand objects from a high level.

For strings (the str type), the primary data that we interact with is the string itself, but that doesn't mean it's the only value a string encompasses. When we talk about the functionality an object encompasses, we mean the methods that the object has access to. We've seen a lot of methods on strings, such as lower and upper.

Thankfully, we can see everything an object encompasses by using the dir built-in function. Let's take a look at a string in the REPL:

$ python3.7
Python 3.7.6 (default, Jan 30 2020, 15:46:02)
[GCC 4.8.5 20150623 (Red Hat 4.8.5-39)] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> my_str = "Test String"
>>> dir(my_str)
['__add__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__dir__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattr
ibute__', '__getitem__', '__getnewargs__', '__gt__', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__iter__', '__le__', '_
_len__', '__lt__', '__mod__', '__mul__', '__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__rmod__', '__rm
ul__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', 'capitalize', 'casefold', 'center', 'count', 'encode',
'endswith', 'expandtabs', 'find', 'format', 'format_map', 'index', 'isalnum', 'isalpha', 'isascii', 'isdecimal', 'isdigit'
, 'isidentifier', 'islower', 'isnumeric', 'isprintable', 'isspace', 'istitle', 'isupper', 'join', 'ljust', 'lower', 'lstri
p', 'maketrans', 'partition', 'replace', 'rfind', 'rindex', 'rjust', 'rpartition', 'rsplit', 'rstrip', 'split', 'splitline
s', 'startswith', 'strip', 'swapcase', 'title', 'translate', 'upper', 'zfill']


The dir function returns a list of all of the variables and functions that the object encompasses. We can chain any of these items off of our object and it will return a value. That value might be a method.

>>> my_str.__doc__
"str(object='') -> str\nstr(bytes_or_buffer[, encoding[, errors]]) -> str\n\nCreate a new string object from the given object. If encoding or\nerrors is specified, then the object must expose a data buffer\nthat will be decoded using the given encoding and error handler.\nOtherwise, returns the result of object.__str__() (if defined)\nor repr(object).\nencoding defaults to sys.getdefaultencoding().\nerrors defaults to 'strict'."
>>> my_str.isdigit
<built-in method isdigit of str object at 0x7f7fc84c11f0>
>>> my_str.isdigit()
False


We can see the documentation for the str type and even access the methods from the object. A good way to tell if something is an object is to try to assign it to a variable. All objects can be assigned to variables.
