
Certified Entry-Level Python Programmer Certification


CHAPTER 16.1
Creating and Using Generators

Normal functions are the primary way that we'll be bundling up logic that we want to use over and over, but Python also provides a way for us to define functions that behave like iterators. These functions are called "generators." In this lesson, we'll learn why we might want to use generators and how to create and use them.

What is a Generator?
A generator is a function that behaves like an iterator. This means that we can ask a generator function for its "next" value and it will calculate it, and return it to us. Similar to how a range doesn't calculate all of the values at once, a generator function essentially "pauses" its execution after returning a single result until the next result is requested.

To learn about generators, let's go ahead and implement a function that works like the built-in range type.

Writing a Generator Function
Generator functions are defined the same way that traditional functions are, except that instead of using the return keyword to provide a result back to the caller, we use the keyword yield. When defining a generator, we will almost always include a loop in the body of the function, and then we'll yield from within the loop. Let's create a new file called gen.py to create our gen_range function.

def gen_range(stop, start=1, step=1):
    num = start
    while num <= stop:
        yield num
        num += step

Unlike the built-in range function, if we call this function with three arguments, they're in the order of stop, start, and step instead of starting with start. But this function effectively works the same way (although not as performant). Let's load our file into the REPL to test out this function:

$ python3.7 -i gen.py
>>> gen_range(10)
<generator object gen_range at 0x1054a8550>
>>>

The first thing to note, is that when we call the generator function, it returns a generator object to us instead of giving us the result. To get each result, we'll use the built-in next function to execute the generator until it hits a yield statement. Let's assign the generator object to a variable and pass it to next a few times:

>>> generator = gen_range(4)
>>> next(generator)
1
>>> next(generator)
2
>>> next(generator)
3
>>>

This is how a generator works. It loops internally, yielding a result each time it's passed to the next function until it reaches the end of the function because it stops looping. Here's what we see if we pass the generator to next too many times:

>>> next(generator)
4
>>> next(generator)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
StopIteration

In practice, we won't normally be calling the next function on our generators. We'll be using them with for loops like this:

>>> for num in gen_range(10, step=2):
...     print(num)
...
1
3
5
7
9
>>>

The for loop automatically knows how to work with generators, so we don't have to worry about running into the StopIteration error.
