
Certified Entry-Level Python Programmer Certification


CHAPTER 16.2
Converting Generators to Lists


Generators are functions that behave like iterators, and that means that they can be used to dynamically calculate items in a loop. But that also means that they can be converted into lists. In this lesson, we'll take a look when and how we can convert a generator into a list.

Converting a Generator to a List
When we're working with generators, we'll often write them in such a way that eventually they won't have anything left to yield. And in that case, we can turn the generator into a list. This might sound like it would be difficult, but it's as easy as passing the generator object into the list function that we've used many times before, to convert things like dict_keys objects to be lists.

Let's load our gen.py file into the REPL again so that we can utilize the gen_range function that we wrote in the previous lecture:

$ python3.7 -i gen.py
>>> generator = gen_range(10)
>>> list(generator)
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]

That was pretty simple. But, it is possible to run into issues with this. Let's say that we define an infinite generator that will always calculate the next item in the Fibonacci sequence we looked at in our recursion lesson.

gen.py

def gen_range(stop, start=1, step=1):
    num = start
    while num <= stop:
        yield num
        num += step

def gen_fib():
    a, b = 0, 1
    while True:
        a, b = b, a + b
        yield a

This function might look a little weird, but to calculate the next item in the Fibonacci sequence, we combine the previous two items with 0 and 1 being our two starting points. This should yield us 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, etc. as we continue to call next on an instance of this generator object:

$ python3.7 -i gen.py
>>> fib = gen_fib()
>>> next(fib)
1
>>> next(fib)
1
>>> next(fib)
2
>>> next(fib)
3
>>> next(fib)
5

We'll never reach the end of this generator function because it includes an infinite loop, and we never use a break statement. Let's see what happens if we try to turn this into a list (don't follow along with this):

>>> list(fib)

We'll see that the prompt hangs. That's because it's looping forever. This is the situation when you can't convert a generator to be a list because the list function will never return.
