
Certified Entry-Level Python Programmer Certification


CHAPTER 14.5
Integrating `else` with Loops

Unlike many languages, loops in Python have an additional clause that we can use: the else clause. In this lesson, we'll take a look at why and when we might want to use this additional Python feature.

The else Clause
The else clause for loops in Python allows us to define an additional code context that will execute when the loop has naturally finished its iteration. In a for loop, this means that we've reached the end of our iteration, and in a while loop it means the conditional has evaluated to False. Here's an example for each of these:

>>> counter = 1
>>> while counter <= 4:
...     print(counter)
...     counter += 1
... else:
...     print("While loop completed")
...
1
2
3
4
While loop completed
>>> for i in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]:
...     print(i)
... else:
...     print("For loop completed")
...
1
2
3
4
5
For loop completed
>>>

This might seem a little useless because we could have just as easily written these additional print statements on the line directly following the loop and achieved the same result. That's true. The else clause isn't that valuable unless we utilize it in conjunction with the break statement. The else clause's body will execute if the break statement is not hit. We can leverage this when we're iterating through a list:

>>> colors = ['red', 'pink', 'blue', 'orange', 'green']
>>> for color in colors:
...     if color == 'orange':
...         print("Orange is in the list")
...         break
... else:
...     print("Orange is not in the list")
Orange is in the list

This is not the most efficient way to search through a list, but it's a good example of when the else clause of a loop has an effect besides just being the expression run after the loop.
